TOTAL SOLAR ECLIPSE, MADRAS, OR, 2017
August 24, 2017, 10:42 pm 
Filed under: Uncategorized
In the preceding hour, we’ve seen several small planes and a helicopter, couple drones. But now that the moment is finally here, the sky is quiet. It is a sultry mid-August morning in central Oregon, and I’m out on a wide open grassy field on a plateau ringed by hills and mountains, no shade in sight. Spiky Mount Jefferson looms to the west, obscured by wildfire smoke. The heat is already well on track by nine, and my forearms radiate the summer sun.

It starts subtly, a tiny nick out of the sun’s disc at about the one o’clock position. I know exactly when to look through my eclipse glasses, or I wouldn’t even notice. Not long after, I notice a flock of birds, flying in formation directly away from the sun’s bearing.   I wonder about the stories of animals behaving differently during eclipses. There are in between moments as we wait. You’re not supposed to use the glasses for more than three minutes at a time, so we have family time, camp time. I pace around our camp and survey our neighbors and the surrounding field. The sun is still more than half lit, but the bite is larger. This is a moon shape we never see.

The change is gradual but steady. Bit by bit the light becomes more diffuse. I have a sudden urge to write so I grab a hotel notepad out of my pack, stand there with pen and paper, goggling at the sky. The air is slightly cooler, the building summer intensity diminished. The black disc continues to drop like ink across the sun, moving with a relentless momentum, a heavy inexorable slide, darkness vanquishing light. I feel a wave of emotion as it goes. It feels like the end of the day, but the shadows aren’t lengthening, they’re just fading, I notice looking at the pole demarcating the border of our campsite. An odd twilight. The breeze ticks up just a bit, and I no longer feel the sun’s heat on my forearms. Instead, they have goosebumps from the cool, and the hairs are standing. I feel an eerie sense of loss that I can’t stop, we continue to slide. The giant black pendulum continues to swing down silently.

With fifteen minutes to go, I’m surprised that our field isn’t darker, more so at the ten minutes mark. At the beginning, I had planned to capture some media at this point, to show the darkened land. But what I don’t realize is that it all happens in the minute or two right before and right after totality. This is why 92% partial is so vastly different from total.

The minutes tick by and the countdown is on. Four minutes, three, two… All of a sudden, everything happens at once. The darkness drops like a cloak, and I can almost hear Ben powering down the tractor beam. Even a tiny glint of our blazing star is enough to warm us but when that last piece goes, the candle is snuffed out. What’s left is a black hole in the sky, surrounded by a flaming ring, with wisps burning off it. The horizon is a 360 degree deep sunset, an orange glow all around. The stars are out, and Venus shines like a desert star above and to the right of the blazing void. I’m overwhelmed. I get down on a knee and hug the kids, and we watch, tears in our eyes. I see three main plumes, two above and one below the maelstrom, flares off into space. The change is constant, even now, the moon’s disc continuing to slide across the sun and change the revealed corona. But it goes as fast as it came, soon we are counting down to putting glasses back on. No sooner do we have them on than a blinding flash explodes off the right edge as the sun reclaims its vantage. Within a minute the earth lightens, and the darkness is gone just as fast as we move in the opposite direction.

In a surprisingly short time, the heat starts to return, and shadows materialize in their standard forms, and I feel a palpable reassurance that we have returned to normal space. I knew that it was coming and I was still gripped by the power and emotion; I can’t imagine how it must have been for the ancients when it just happened, unexpected.

We turn our focus to packing our camp, taking breaks to pick up the eclipse glasses and have a look, watching the moon move in the seven o’clock direction of the sun’s disc. When it’s 2/3 of the way off, I realize my skin is hot again, and reach for the sunscreen. By the time I’m pulling out tent stakes, it’s once again a glorious, raging summer day in America.